# Palaeoverse Meetings 2024

## 2024-10-03

**Time:** 14:00 UTC

**Participants:**

- Lewis (Agenda)
- Erin (Minutes)
- Harriet
- Joe
- Kilian
- Will
- Bruna
- Lucas
- Bethany

**Apologies:**
- TBC

### Introductions
New team members:
- Joe
- Harriet

### Packages
palaeoverse (Lewis):  
- Several active PRs (getting through those issues!) - thanks to those submitting/reviewing
- Some PRs require additional review (3):
  1) new equal area lat bin function (quick to review);
  2) making binary vector for taxa (leave for next version);
  3) tax range time function suggestion from R Garwood ‚Äì Bethany is tackling this
- Aim is to submit new version soon, once #1 and #3 are reviewed
- Additionally, major changes made to paleorotate: previously used mid age of stages ‚Äì now high res every 1 million years; updated plates data
- package is now tibble friendly (Will, Kilian, Lewis) ‚Äì how much re-testing is needed, some bugs tricky to spot (Kilian)?
- Bethany/Joe: Adam Kocsis has a new GPlates package, how much overlap with palaeoverse? Some crossover, expands from palaeorotate function; Joe: worth extending paleorotate to have local installation of GPlates ‚Äì lot of internal code for simple function so probably not needed esp if offered in RGPlates
- Will: Do preset rotations need to be updated? Different versions of the same model; static but may need updating in the future
- Bethany: PBDB now allows subspecies designations ‚Äì need to check this
- Timeline: goal is to finish addressing pending PRs by end of next week

rphylopic (Will):  
- Updating vignettes
- Some need precompiling in Markdown since they use online resources that are sometimes down
- Now files are more contributor friendly: all source files in a folder called ‚Äúsource‚Äù which contains .Rmd files with formatting (vs .orig); compiled file ‚Äúread only‚Äù with a comment to indicate which file should then be edited

rmacrostrat (Lewis):  
- Accepted for publication at Geosphere, will be out in the next few weeks YAY

sepkoski (Lewis):  
- Major overhaul of the sepkoski package (feedback welcome!)
- Now can generate Sepkoski curve in ggplot
- Aim is to submit new version to CRAN soon

### Open Palaeontology
Short pitch (Harriet)
- New community-run journal, diamond open access (free to read/publish)
- Platform in Switzerland ‚Äì online platform, DOI, funds taken care of
- Flexible publication type and review structure ‚Äì goal is to make paleo publications more accessible/transparent/accountable (e.g., peer review process and structure similar to Copernicus journals), beneficial for ECRs, can publish non-results/methods/etc beyond the traditional research paper
- Website is live but still in progress: openpaleo.org
- Plan to open for submissions by the end of the year
- Opportunities to get involved in the journal side of things and submissions ‚Äì recruiting editors, committee members, etc
- They are also hoping to collaborate with groups like palaeoverse to get community input on publishing needs, e.g. standardizing publishing of occurrence data to facilitate entry into PBDB and interoperability across databases
- Oct 20 handing editor training
- Harrie is happy to chat with palaeoverse members about opportunities; will have poster at PalAss and other meetings to get the word out and build rapport with the community
- What papers might we submit to the journal? Have a think
- Chatting with similar journals in the "League of Diamonds" like Sedimentologica
  
### Account access
GitHub, Gmail (Drive), Slack, Google group:  
- All should now have access
- Google calendar with meetings

### Events
Lecture series (Erin):  
- New series confirmed, started advertising
- Changed time to 16:00 UTC to help get participation numbers up, esp in Europe
- Advertising on Twitter, emailed previous registrants, next step is PaleoNet
- ~50 registrants so far
- Speakers sorted until the end of January, for more ideas check attendee ideas from registration forms
- Let us know if you want to help organize the series

CPEG workshop (Erin):  
- No major updates
- Pedro Godoy joining workshop development committee
- We will start developing materials in ~Jan
- This could be an opportunity to develop multilingual resources (Portuguese, Spanish?); this would be great for follow-up workshops in Brazil with Pedro‚Äôs group

GSA workshop (Will):  
- Will is confirming whether we are running the next workshop (fall 2025) or not ‚Äì we should know within weeks so can start planning ahead\
- Material for GSA workshop will build from CPEG workshop making the prep easier; also envisioning some overlap in instructors

Greenman Festival Outreach (Chris):
- Previously ran a stall on fossil record bias ‚Äì do we want to submit proposal to PalAss to run something similar in the future?

### Resources
Resource page (Chris):  
- In progress... Lewis needs the spreadsheet to embed into the website or will create a filterable table based on the spreadsheet

Website (Lewis):
- In progress...looking for a helper
- Quarto Markdown

Social media:  
- Bluesky: could we create a corporate account? Best email address to attach it to? Could create an email with the palaeoverse domain; will look at this for the next meeting but planning to move forward with migrating
- Instagram: image-based so would we have enough to post? Could be a nice archive, but requires more investment to make posts; plan: start with Bluesky and then maybe think about Instagram

### Projects
Using R in palaeobiology: a review of recent developments and future directions/What has R done for palaeobiology? (Will):  
- Will is finalizing the CRAN task view now ‚Äì scope: anything that touches on paleontology
- Next step is to build the paper around that, following a similar structure to the hydrology paper that Lewis shared ages ago
- Proposed workflow: full draft of CRAN task view --> comments/feedback --> submit --> develop broad structure of the paper --> divvy up sections among co-author group
- If you want to join the team, let Will/Lewis know

10 rules for data cleaning (Lewis):
- Focused on fossil occurrence datasets, grounded in our experiences and common issues to lean into everyone‚Äôs expertise
- Similar to ‚Äú7 rules of simulations‚Äù paper in Paleobiology
- Still deciding on where to publish, maybe Open Paleontology?
- First meeting: 2024-10-07, 14:00 UTC
- Timeline: compile draft by endish of the year?

### Other projects and business
Shiny app (Will, proposed):
- Will: R for paleontology shiny app for running basic analysis, GUI similar to PAST; 10 rules could be ‚Äústeps‚Äù in the app?; aim is to be teaching oriented ‚Äì app could provide R code to reproduce the point-and-click actions; could include teaching exercises/modules? Will be recruiting helpers soon

Internationalization of R documentation (Will):
- Will: CRAN/posit are starting to push for internationalization for R documentation, e.g. creating documentation/vignettes in different languages
- We could look into doing this for palaeoverse, building from this developer support and our international community; will need help with translation -- how do we want to potentially approach this, e.g. search for funding for freelance translation work, do internally using online translation service as a starting point to edit; what about automatic translators like Google chrome/safari use? Discussion to be continued but important as we continue to develop the suite of packages
- Harriet: note that R compiler just recognizes Roman/latin characters, English ‚Äì documents much more simple than internationalizing the actual code
- Bethany: the Shiny app might be a nice way to play around with translation, or r phylopic
  
### Next meeting
2024-11-07, 14:00 UTC

### A.O.B.
Sofia stepping back

## 2024-09-05

**Time:** 14:00 UTC

**Participants:**

- Lewis (Agenda)
- Chris (Minutes)
- Pedro
- Erin
- Bethany
- Bruna
- Will

**Apologies:**
- Joe (running a course)

### Introductions
New team members:
- Bruna
- Joe
- Harriet

### Packages
palaeoverse (Lewis):  
- Not too much going on. Several issues that need addressing.  
- Some to do with new functionality, some to do with preexisting functions.  
- Idea for new function (developed by Bethany and Lewis), potentially for new members to take forward.  

rphylopic (Will):  
- New version out! Now able to justify the Phylopic (left/right alignment), and can specify width as well as height.  
- Doing very well ~15,000 downloads in the last year.  
- However, people not being so hot on citing original image creators. Any ideas on how to improve this are welcome.

rmacrostrat (Lewis):  
- Now live on CRAN (for over a month). Over 500 downloads so far.  
- In review at Geosphere.  
- Deeptime 2.0 (congrats Will!) uses rmacrostrat heavily in a new vignette.  
- rmacrostrat grant has now closed. Reports have been sent, money has not been sent back yet. No further admin for grant going forwards.

sepkoski (Lewis):  
- Next steps are to make a ggplot2 version.

### Open Palaeontology
Short pitch (Harriet):  
- Harriet is starting a new Diamond access journal for palaeontology, currently looking for members to help take part.  
- Aims to be able to report a variety of results that would not necessarily fit in other journals.  
- Harriet not here this week, so will wait until next meeting to discuss fully.  
  
### Account access
GitHub, Gmail, Slack, Google group:  
- New members have joined, need to ensure access to various affiliated platforms.  
- Lewis has admin rights, will provide this after this meeting.  

### Events
Lecture series (Erin):  
- 3rd lecture in the last block of talks last Thursday, now online. Next lecture is the end of September.  
- Need to invite the next 4 speakers.
  - Have 4 people ready, just need to be formally invited.
  - Confirmed that the current list should be invited. Erin to remind on Slack.
- Also need to block next time zone. Currently have dropped in live viewership since shifting to new US timezone (dropped from ~60 to ~20 live viewers).
  - Advertising far in advance to ensure high numbers of attendees.
  - Pedro noted similar drop has occurred in PaleoPERCS.
  - Suggested to shift back to EU timezone and monitor attendance.  

CPEG workshop (Erin):  
- Invited to give a workshop at the next CPEG meeting in July 2025.
- Proposal has been accepted and the wokshop will be held on July 27th.
- Will be similar to workshop given at NAPC, but expanded in terms of content, and covering both ecology and palaeontology.
- Looking for additional people to lead workshop. Feel free to put yourself down in the appropriate Google Sheet.
- Learn lessons from NAPC; timekeeping and preparation beforehand.  

GSA workshop (Will):  
- Putting in a proposal, but no confirmation yet. Is likely to be accepted, but won't be looked at until post 2024 meeting.
- Similar to proposal for CPEG; expand half day to a full day, including open science topics.
- Once again, anyone is welcome. No funding for travel.  

Greenman Festival Outreach (Chris):
- Potential for running a science outreach stall at Greenman festival. This will kick off in early 2025.
- Let Chris know if you're interested in helping out.

### Resources
Directory and Grant Track(Lewis):
- Question about whether it's worth updating the Directory, particularly in regard to job applications.
- Could be just a labs/conferences Directory; seems to be a wise idea.
- Will keep these active for now.
- Sofia is potentially stepping back from this. New members can potentially fill in this spot.

Resource page (Chris):  
- Resources put together for the NAPC workshop.
- Currently available as an excel spreadsheet; suggested to keep this way so it can be pulled from the website.
- Will continue to update it. Encourage others to add to it as well.
- Can also be filled in during work for future workshops.

Website (Lewis):
- Lewis continuing to update and maintain it.
- Would be helpful to have an additional member to assist with this.
- Will can potentially help with automating the process. Will discuss offline. 

Minutes (Lewis):
- Going to do round robin of members from now on to ensure that it's not too much work. 
CRAN task view (Will):
- Will made new draft of list of packages back in June to adere to CRAN's input (too broad in some regards, too picky for specific packages)
- Now have a list of all specific palaeontology packages. Has received positive review so far.
- Next step will be prose RE each package.

Bluesky account (Bethany):  
- With Twitter dying, general shift to other social media sites (e.g. Bluesky, Threads).
- Bluesky has grown enough in palaeo-presence that it might be worth our time to make an account.
- Unsure about institutional account access (e.g. how many people can have access to an account).
- Bethany to investigate further before next meeting.
- Also suggestion to make an instagram account.

### Projects
Using R in palaeobiology: a review of recent developments and future directions/What has R done for palaeobiology? (Lewis):
- Aim to make review article that can tie in with CRAN task view.
- Aim to start in January.
- Will start a separate Slack channel to kick this off. 

10 rules for data cleaning (Lewis):
- Potential for an article/opinion piece along these lines for data cleaning in palaeo.
- Format is done in PLOS.
- Again, will discuss in separate Slack channel.
  
### Next meeting
2024-10-03, 14:00 UTC

### A.O.B.
Outgoing members?
- Several members not turned up to meetings in a while. Lewis to touch base to figure out whether they still want to be a part of the team.

Brazil Hackathon (Bruna):
- Suggestions for hackathon in Brazil, potentially run with Pedro.
- Pedro submitted a grant for additional funding for things like this; would be 5-6 years of funding.
- Will discuss further offline. 

## 2024-07-11

**Time:** 14:00 UTC

**Participants:**

- Lewis
- Erin

**Topics**

- Introductions
- Packages
  - palaeoverse
  - rphylopic
  - rmacrostrat
- Expanding team
  - Lewis to email 
- Open Palaeontology journal
- GitHub
- Funding
- Meetings 
  - NAPC Workshop
  - NAPC Session
  - Lecture series
  - CPEG Workshop (proposed)
- Next meeting
  - August break? 
  - **2024/09/05 - 14:00 UTC**
- A.O.B.

## 2024-06-06

**Time:** 14:00 UTC

**Participants:**

- Lewis A. Jones
- Bethany Allen
- Pedro Godoy
- Christopher Dean
- William Gearty

**Topics**

- Introductions
- Packages
  - palaeoverse

    *In the coming weeks, `bin_space` will receive some updates by Lewis to fix issues with grid plotting. Similarly, `palaeorotate` will be updated to incorporate new pre-rotated grids.*

  - rphylopic

    *No updates of note.*
    
  - rmacrostrat
 
    *Version 0.0.1 of rmacrostrat coming soon, expected to be on CRAN by the end of June.*
    
- Expanding team

  *Two new members planned to be invited to join the team in September as associated members. Invitation email to be drafted by Lewis.*

- Website

  *Pop-out boxes and orange highlight removed from About Us section. Links also added for each team member. Further refinements needed to avoid line wrapping in text*.

- GitHub

  *Package logos should be added to GitHub landing paging*.

- Funding

  *rmacrostrat workshop was a big success. Plan to apply for project-specific funding going forward. Consider applying for further funding for a workshop prior to CPEG next year to bring everyone together*.

- Meetings 
  - NAPC Workshop

    *Everything is in order (more or less!). Finishing touches to website needed, and incorporation of everyone's materials.*

  - NAPC Session

    *All in hand, no further action needed at this time.*

  - Lecture series
    - [YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCTzcJ84EF08PZX6VfNDf0Hg)

    *Lecture series continues to grow, with a great turnout last lecture (67 attendees). Next set of talks needs advertising.*

- Next meeting
  - **2024/07/11 - 14:00 UTC**

- A.O.B.

  *None of note.*

## 2024-05-02

**Time:** 14:00 UTC

**Participants:**

- Lewis
- Bethany
- Will
- Chris
- Erin

**Topics**

- Introductions
- Updates
  - New release of palaeoverse
    - Thanks @Bethany, @Will, and @Kilian
  - New release of rphylopic
- To do
  - **@Miranta editable versions of cheat sheets still needed**
  - **@Lewis, website updates still needed**  
    **Remove pop-out boxes on about us (inc. colour)**  
    **Send links to personal websites to Lewis if you want to include on website**  
    **Fix scroll point to view headers completely**
  - New logo in preparation by Miranta, drafts to be circulated for comments from the team  
    **@Miranta could you circulate once you have some drafts please?**
  - Launch new website, promote directory/grant track  
    **We will re-launch the website to promote the directory/grant track, post on X and paleonet.**
    **Look into scraping some data from palaeontology societies to add to the directory/grant track** 
- Packages
  - palaeoverse
  - rphylopic
  - rmacrostrat
- Website
- GitHub
- Funding
- Meetings 
  - NAPC Workshop  
  - NAPC Session  
  - Lecture series
    - [YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCTzcJ84EF08PZX6VfNDf0Hg)
    - Keep pushing on social media
- Next meeting
  - **2024/06/06 - 14:00 UTC**
- A.O.B.

## 2024-04-04

**Time:** 14:00 UTC

**Participants:**

- Lewis
- Bethany
- Will
- Kilian
- Erin
- Pedro

**Topics**

- Introductions
- Packages
  - palaeoverse
    - Meeting with Joe update
    - `tax_range_time` PR  
      **@Kilian agreed to review active PR**
      **New version of should be released ASAP**
    - Cheat sheet needs updating.  
      **@Miranta could you help with that or provide an editable version?**
  - rphylopic
    - Cheat sheet needs updating.  
      **@Miranta could you help with that or provide an editable version?**
  - rmacrostrat
- Website
  - New logo in preparation by Miranta, drafts to be circulated for comments from the team  
    **@Miranta could you circulate once you have some drafts please?**
  - Website updated! Feedback please.  
    **Remove pop-out boxes on about us (inc. colour)**  
    **Send links to personal websites to Lewis if you want to include on website**  
    **Fix scroll point to view headers completely**  
  - Launch new website, promote directory/grant track  
    **We will re-launch the website to promote the directory/grant track, post on X and paleonet.**
    **Look into scraping some data from palaeontology societies to add to the directory/grant track** 
- GitHub
- Funding
- Meetings 
  - NAPC Workshop  
    **Set up meeting ASAP**  
    **Reach out to Matt about increasing capacity**  
  - NAPC Session  
  - GSA workshop
  - Lecture series
    - **Over 60 attendees!**
    - [YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCTzcJ84EF08PZX6VfNDf0Hg)
    - Keep pushing on social media
- Next meeting
  - **2024/05/02 - 14:00 UTC**
- A.O.B.

## 2024-03-07

**Time:** 14:00 UTC

**Participants:**

- Lewis A. Jones
- Bethany Allen
- Erin Dillon
- William Gearty
- Christopher Dean

**Topics**

- Introductions
- Packages
  - palaeoverse
    - `tax_range_time` PR  
      **@Chris to review active PR**
    - New function! `tax_range_strat` now included in the package  
      **New version of palaeoverse should be released in the next two weeks, hopefully with additional updates if they can be implemented quickly**
    - Cheat sheet needs updating.  
      **@Miranta could you help with that or provide an editable version?**
  - rphylopic
    - Cheat sheet needs updating.  
      **@Miranta could you help with that or provide an editable version?**
  - rmacrostrat
    - Meeting?  
      **14/03/2024 - 14:00 UTC**
- Website
  - New logo in preparation by Miranta, drafts to be circulated for comments from the team  
    **@Miranta could you circulate once you have some drafts please?**
  - Website updated! Feedback please.  
    **Please let Lewis know if you have any comments**
  - Launch new website, promote directory/grant track  
    **We will re-launch the website to promote the directory/grant track, post on X and paleonet.**
    **Look into scraping some data from palaeontology societies to add to the directory/grant track** 
- GitHub
  - The move continues... the community repo is starting to take form with core documents like the code of conduct. Lewis/Chris will work on the resource repo in March.  
    **Updates in the next meeting**
- Funding
  - What do we need?  
    **No need for immediate funding, compartmentalising projects seems to be the way forward. However, we should really think about funding for a full-time technician/postdoc in the next year or two**
- Meetings 
  - NAPC Workshop  
    **@Lewis to setup a meeting within the next two weeks**
  - NAPC Session  
    **All going well, nothing more to do at this time**
    - Palaeoverse poster resources
    **Updates to palaeoverse package poster will be needed prior to NAPC, we should consider whether we want some standardised style for all Palaeoverse packages**.
  - Lecture series
    - **Over 60 attendees!**
    - [YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCTzcJ84EF08PZX6VfNDf0Hg)
    - Keep pushing on social media
    - Change in time for the next set of lectures?  
      **The next block of talks will cater for the Americas, with 14:00 EST (19:00 UTC). @All suggestions for speakers from N/S America welcome!**  
- Next meeting
  - **2024/04/04 - 14:00 UTC**
  - Regular meeting schedule, first Thursday of each month? **Agreed, next meeting 2024/04/04 - 14:00 UTC**
- A.O.B.
  - Anything?  
    **Will to submit a proposal for a GSA 2025 workshop on open-source/science and programming in palaeontology**  
    **Chris and Lewis to meet with Joe to discuss potential formation binner package**

## 2024-02-08

**Time:** 14:00 UTC

**Participants:**

- Lewis Jones
- Bethany Allen
- William Gearty
- Christopher Dean
- Erin Dillon
- Alessandro Chiarenza

**Topics**

- Introductions
- Packages
  - palaeoverse
    - Issues are starting to pile up, Lewis (and Chris) to get on top of some before the next meeting
    - `plot_strat`/`tax_range_strat` almost ready for incorporation -> New release should follow
  - rphylopic
    - Everything looking good, a small few tweaks underway for minor functionality improvements (e.g. image justification)
    - Cheat sheet will need updating in the near future. **@Miranta could you help with that or provide an editable version?**
  - rmacrostrat
    - Development team to meet next week (2024-02-15; 14:00 UTC)
- Website
  - New logo in preparation by Miranta, drafts to be circulated for comments from the team
  - Website updates slow, but in progress..
- GitHub
  - The move continues... the community repo is starting to take form with core documents like the code of conduct. Lewis/Chris will work on the resource repo in March.
- Funding
  - SNSF Scientific Exchange: Funded! ‚úîÔ∏èüí∞
    - This grant will help support the development of rmacrostrat and will be used for the core developers to work intensely on development in May, in Switzerland.
- Meetings
  - NAPC Workshop
    - Workshop team to meet before the end of February to start moving forward. 
  - NAPC session: everything in order, slowly getting more submissions. More expected in the next few days.
  - Lecture series
    - **Over 100 signups already! Keep pushing on social media.**
    - We are aiming to record lectures and share on YouTube, speaker permission required.
- Next meeting
  - **2024/03/07 - 14:00 UTC** 
- A.O.B.
  - Nada!
