# Palaeoverse Meetings 2025

# 2025-04-03

Time: 14:00 UTC

Participants: 
- Lewis (Agenda)
- Harrie
- Will
- Chris
- Bethany
- Erin (Minutes)

Apologies: 
- Pedro
- Bruna
- Joe
- Lucas

## Introductions

## Packages
### palaeoverse
#### [Active PRs](https://github.com/palaeoverse/palaeoverse/pulls)
- [tax_range_time/strat grouping](https://github.com/palaeoverse/palaeoverse/pull/122): Lewis and Bethany are updating; Lewis working on tax_range_time; Bethany/Will to update strat
- [Convert id certainty into binary vector](https://github.com/palaeoverse/palaeoverse/pull/125): Pull request from Bruna to check certainty; no family specified
- Active PRs to be dealt with, but waiting on people to settle into new jobs etc. Will bring up again next meeting to assess progress.
  
#### [Active issues](https://github.com/palaeoverse/palaeoverse/issues)
- Discuss: axis_geo updates
- Will submitted pull request yesterday. axis_geo function to autofit text and shrink labels to fit within boxes (similar to deeptime), plus a couple of other minor changes to make         it more consistent with deeptime
- Debating approach and philosophy of function to keep it in line with base R plotting; two aspects: duplicated axis labels and title
- Decided to leave as is (no white rectangle) but to implement the title suggestion and focus on providing clear documentation; otherwise this introduces a lot of hacky-ness to create the white box to cover up the duplicated text, especially if we haven't heard of users running into issues with plotting (vs. plotting in ggplot with deeptime); add to Will's open pull request

  
- Discuss: collection collapse
- Idea would be to collapse PBDB collections to be individual “instances”; can do this easily with tidyverse using `distinct()` so do we need to implement in palaeoverse? e.g. allocate groupings to look for and create tables of unique sets

### rphylopic
- All good here

### rmacrostrat
- Access to outcrop maps
- Macrostrat causing problems - data that users want to access is outcrop maps (shape polygons that represent a formation or geological unit); macrostrat has them at global scale but not as accessible “macrostrat entities”; can access from lat/long coords or formation names BUT not as an entire list of all map IDs, e.g. to get all outcrops of a given age
- Macrostrat doesn’t want to make these data accessible (too much data, too much weight on server, want to regulate the data)
- Next version of API may allow filtering, e.g. by time -- or maybe even “pay to play” service… :/ *outrage*

### sepkoski
- All good, Lewis to update a couple of minor things

## Funding
### Software Sustainability Institute
[Research Software Maintenance Fund](https://www.software.ac.uk/research-software-maintenance-fund/round-1)

- Meeting next week to start developing grant, to submit this year
- Half million, for 2 years
- Aim to hire 2 people (package maintenance/development & community engagement/resources) - salaries to be set by UK salary grades, ~60/40? split between the two positions in terms of salary?; Also $$ for workshops, community activities, Miranta’s artwork, outreach
- UCL overhead 20%
- more discussion to come!

### NSF/SNSF
- Table discussion; similar scope to Software Sustainability Institute + OPAL
- Revisit end of May or early June

### PAGES
- Table discussion
- Look into if we don’t get the Software Sustainability grant

## New members
- Potentially inviting some new people to join, with specific project in mind
- Anshuman Swain (microfossils, network analysis) - Michigan
- Mark Nicholas (phylogenetics, morphometrics, trilobites, simulations) - Stanford
- Niklas Hohmann (stratigraphy/geology, open science) - Utrecht
- Need to start thinking more about team structure if we get big grants (more visibility, responsibility); don’t want to be exclusionary
- Supervisory hierarchy (E.g., Core group + collaborators)

## Events
### Lecture series
- Good for now, speakers through June

### CPEG workshops
- Meet in 2 weeks; Erin will send update on Friday

### GSA workshop
- Get new people involved in the GSA workshop
- Need to submit invoice soon for reimbursements
- Starting to plan

## PalAss Newsletter series
- Deadline end of May
- Slack channel
- Temporal binning (Chris to lead); Chris might also do some updates to the package (Chris and Lewis to discuss)
- Spreadsheet to plan/schedule upcoming articles

## Resources
- No updates

### Materials
- No updates

### Website
- No updates

### Social media
- Gaining followers on Bluesky

## Projects
### 10 rules for data cleaning
- SUBMITTED - HUZZAH!
- Send out for review
- Lots of views/recommendations on ResearchGate
- Comic strip with each panel representing different steps?

### Using R in palaeobiology: a review of recent developments and future directions/What has R done for palaeobiology? (Will):  
-	CRAN task view done! (https://cran.r-project.org/view=Paleontology)
-	Plan of action to be discussed
-	Get new people involved so wait until they are onboarded

### Proposals?
- Chris: paper ‘coding’ review, availability of code/data in pipeline = state of reproducibility in paleontology; see: Slack conversations for 10rules project and https://www.researchgate.net/publication/385981300_Functional_R_code_is_rare_in_species_distribution_and_abundance_papers; Harrie supportive --> Could be a good fit for OPAL, pushes the agenda of open paleontology

- Bethany: non-paleo people using sepkoski database over PBDB; looking at overlap in datasets sepkoski vs PBDB and flag gaps; could also compare with other databases
Draft abstract length vision of each project

## Next meeting
2025-05-01, 14:00 UTC  
Minute taker? TBD

## A.O.B

# 2025-03-06

Time: 14:00 UTC

Participants: 
- Lewis (Agenda)
- Joe (Minutes)
- Harriet
- Will
- Chris
- Erin
- Pedro
- Ale
- Bethany

## Introductions
Hello and such (doomscrolling, haircuts, Zoom backgrounds)

## Packages (no updates)
NA
### palaeoverse
NA
### rphylopic
NA
### rmacrostrat
NA
### sepkoski
NA
## Funding (no updates)
NA
### NSF/SNSF (Will) 
NA
### PAGES (Erin) 
NA

## Events
### Lecture series (Erin)
Uptick in viewership and subscribers (superb). People to reach out more generally to sort future speakers as they like.

### CPEG Workshops (Erin)
Looks like nearly a full house for palaeoverse attendance - more hands for the workshop!

### GSA workshop (Will)
Possibly four palaeoverse members present at GSA.

## PalAss Newsletter series (Harriet)
Next deadline for end of May/early June. Plan is for a vignette on temporal binning.

## Resources
NA
### Materials
NA
### Website (Lewis)
NA

### Social media
Full change to BlueSky, memberships trickling in. Everyone to keep an eye out for solutions to take the workload off of Bethany (Bruna said she might be available to help, although Bethany would need to verify each new login).
Keep sending stuff on the BlueSky channel on Slack for upload.

## Projects
### Using R in palaeobiology: a review of recent developments and future directions/What has R done for palaeobiology? (Will):  
-	CRAN task view done! (https://cran.r-project.org/view=Paleontology)
-	Waiting on 10 rules to be wrapped to push this forwards.

### 10 rules for data cleaning (Lewis):
- Everyone to provide edits and feedback (point list by Lewis available on Slack) by the 14th of March, with the view to submit by the week of the 17th.
- The finished article can be put up as a preprint to kickstart visibility.
- No issue for open access funding with Lewis as the lead author (UCL policy is fine)

- Where to submit?
  - Some journals eliminated by scope or wordcount (Palaeobiology, TREE)
  - Issue with OPal is ethos versus impact - might be complicated to justify
  - Action to email the editors for other journals to discuss the potential for the article
  - In order of preference: Palaeontology > Annu. Rev. Earth. > Scientific Data > PLoS
  - Other possibilities are RSOS, Nature Reviews, MEE, Journal of Evolutionary Biology, Lethaia, Palaeo Electronica
  
- Boxes
  - Good work Chris! General impression seems to be that they are positive
  - Possibility that they are a little informal. Some figures might help with the boxes too - could tie the iconography from Figure 1 to each box
  - Boxes are ultimately not a structural part of the paper, so we are safe to keep them in and then remove them if that is the recommendation of review
  
- Figure
  - Joe to change figure background to white/transparent
  
- Author order
  - Proposed order by Lewis: Lewis (overall lead), Chris (editorial, boxes), Bethany (vignette lead), Harriet (editorial), Joe (figure lead), alphabetical for remaining authors
  - 
## Next meeting
2025-04-03, 14:00 UTC (note daylight saving)

## A.O.B
- Branding: need to recheck hex colours and font for newest logo and ensure that this file is readily available
  
- GDPR
  - For the registered lecture attendees: user data appears to be stored and encrypted within Zoom, so no obvious risk on our end
  - As long as the data is not re-used for a different purpose to that of initial collection (or any other uses that the individual opted in for at the time), then that should be fine.
  - Action will be to delete user data when it is no longer needed (e.g., workshop participants) or to remove all individual-identifying data (but retain e.g., participant counts).

---

# 2025-02-06

Time: 14:00 UTC

Participants: 
- Lewis (Agenda)
- Chris (Minutes)
- Harrie
- Lucas
- Will
- Pedro
- Joe
- Erin
- Bruna
- Bethany

Apologies:
- Ale

## Introductions
Hello, hello, hello (all accomplished fine)

## Packages

### palaeoverse
#### [Active PRs](https://github.com/palaeoverse/palaeoverse/pulls)
- [tax_range_time/strat grouping](https://github.com/palaeoverse/palaeoverse/pull/122)
- [Convert id certainty into binary vector](https://github.com/palaeoverse/palaeoverse/pull/125)
- Active PRs to be dealt with, but waiting on people to settle into new jobs etc. Will bring up again next meeting to assess progress. 

#### [Issues to resolve](https://github.com/palaeoverse/palaeoverse/issues)
- Several issues; Lewis to carve out some time to address.
  
### rphylopic
- Nothing of note.

### rmacrostrat
- No updates on API changes yet from Shanan.
- Likely to be looked at again this month or March.

### sepkoski
- Nothing of note.

## Funding
### NSF/SNSF (Will) 
- Potentially problematic this year. Might be best to wait until dust settles.
- General "War on Woke" happening on NSF grants. Software likely to not be affected by this, but unsure of knock on ramifications.
- Due in November.
- Will keep an eye on it, readdress in April/May.

### PAGES (Erin) 
- Group endorsements
- Event endorsements
- Workshop sponsorship
- Latest deadline: 2nd of March. Some time to put together an application.
- Can apply for basic endorsement (no financial) but can advertise with them and piggyback their network/reach.
- Also funds to get $3000 dollars to help run workshops; unsure if it's for attendees or organisers; Erin to check
- Other funds to get continued financial support for Palaeoverse.
- Have had some support already for Palaeoverse applying.
- Will check on the responsibilities that come with affiliation with PAGES.

## Events
### Lecture series (Erin)
- Advertise! Push on Bluesky.
- Waiting for some final titles from guest speakers.

### CPEG Workshops
- Need to organise a meeting in the next month to get content nailed down, particularly with the large scope of the workshop.
- Overran at NAPC; will need to re-adjust materials.

### GSA workshop (Will)
- Officially have money!
- ¢5000 for folks running the workshop.
- Need to know relatively soon who can attend, and who will assist in running the workshop.
- October 19th to the 22nd, in San Antonio, Texas.

## PalAss Newsletter series (Harriet)
- First draft done for the intro piece, drafted by Lewis and Chris and edited by Harrie.
- Deadline for the next one will be late May, early June.
- First topic: temporal binning.
- What else to include in the series?
- Will draft up a list, and people can put their names down for topics they're interested in.

## Resources
### Materials  
-	Organisation logo available!
-	Lewis will send round link.

### Website (Lewis)  
-	Lewis to update website with organisation logo.
-	Should we replace X/Twitter on website with Bluesky?

### Social media
- Abandon X completely?
- General consensus seems to be to entirely leave Twitter, meaning that Bluesky will become our default social platform.
- Need to share account so that work isn't entirely left to Bethany. Some approval required to log into account. Safe for maybe one or two people, more dubious with many.
- Suggest for another person to assist Bethany.
- Open call at the moment; will revisit next meeting.
- In the meantime, tag palaeoverse in posts that should be shared etc.

## Projects
### Using R in palaeobiology: a review of recent developments and future directions/What has R done for palaeobiology? (Will):  
-	CRAN task view done! (https://cran.r-project.org/view=Paleontology)
-	Waiting on 10 rules to be wrapped to push this forwards.

### 10 rules for data cleaning (Lewis):
-	Discuss publication evaluation and how to move forward
-	Analysis proved problematic; little agreement between us.
-	Leaves several options:
    1. Abandon analysis and continue paper without it.
    2. Go back to the drawing board and redo the analysis; would require work to be redone prior to the full analysis.
- If we do leave it be, could take the analysis into its own separate paper.
- General consensus to leave the analysis for another paper, but highlighting the ambiguity around some of these topics in the present manuscript.
- Two major things to push paper towards the finish line:
    1. One or two people going through the manuscript to come up with a singular 'voice' for the manuscript, tying all of that together. Lewis and Chris volunteered so far; Harriet has volunteered on the call.
    2. Come up with a continuous example showing how you utilise the rules.
- Potentially have a narrative approach to showing how individuals may carry out data analysis. Would also help people who might not have familiarity with R
- Also need a figure potentially.
- **Next step**: Lewis, Harrie and Chris to edits together the document in the next couple of weeks. Will then develop the continued example.
- **Next step**: Will, Bethany, Erin to think about narrative and approach for the vignette.
- **Next step**: Bruna, Pedro, Joe to think about figure. 
- Next steps done by 20th of Feb.
- Aim to submit by the end of the month, or very shortly afterwards. 

## Next meeting
2025-03-06, 14:00 UTC

## A.O.B
- N/A

---

# 2025-01-09

Time: 14:00 UTC

Participants: 
- Lewis (Agenda)
- Chris (Minutes)
- Miranta
- Joe
- Harry
- Ale

Apologies:
- Bethany
- Will
- Erin

## Introductions
Welcome back! Happy New Year!

## Packages

### palaeoverse
#### [Active PRs](https://github.com/palaeoverse/palaeoverse/pulls)
- [tax_range_time/strat grouping](https://github.com/palaeoverse/palaeoverse/pull/122)  
- [Convert id certainty into binary vector](https://github.com/palaeoverse/palaeoverse/pull/125)
- Aim is still to get these wrapped up by the end of January.

#### [Issues to resolve](https://github.com/palaeoverse/palaeoverse/issues)
- More additional features as opposed to bugs.
- Lewis plans to clear one or two by the end of January.

### rphylopic
- Nothing of note

### rmacrostrat
- No updates on API changes yet.

### sepkoski
- Lewis aims to put together a short article on Sepkoski's life including the package as a formal publication, potentially for OPal.

## Funding
### NSF/SNSF (Will) 
- Applying for a sizable 2-3 year grant to run workshops and further develop open science resources in palaeontology (https://new.nsf.gov/funding/opportunities/geo-ose-geosciences-open-science-ecosystem/nsf25-506/solicitation)
- The larger grant would be supporting 1-2 postdocs who would work with OPal/Palaeoverse.

### PAGES (Erin) 
- Group endorsements
- Event endorsements
- Workshop sponsorship
- More details from Erin forthcoming after her and Lewis figure out potential commitments.

## Events
### Lecture series (Erin)
- Settling in to ~35 attendees each week
- Great lineup of upcoming speakers, maybe advertise longer list in January?

### GSA workshop (Will)
- Finally officially approved!
- Looks like we will be able to get some funding (~$1000) for speaker travel, although specifics are still being decided
- More details from Will in the future.
- Will start putting items together this month.

### Greenman Festival Outreach (Chris)
- Nothing to report

## PalAss Newsletter series (Harriet)
- Palaeoverse to do a series in the PalAss newsletter over the next couple of issues.
- Similar to the 'R for Palaeobiologists' series.
- Next issue, aim to write an introduction piece about what we do, highlighting some major things that we have already, e.g. CRAN taskview, Palaeoverse, rmacrostrat, rphylopic etc etc.
- Would need to be completed this month. Deadline is Feb 3rd, but can potentially be pushed a week or so.
- Aim for two A4 pages of non-dense text (approx. 1000 words max).
- Can also use as a space to call for contributions from the community.
- Joint written piece in a google doc.
- Harriet to lead, but open call for contributions.

## Resources
### Materials  
-	Miranta working on organisation logo. Aim to get done by the deadline for the PalAss newsletter.
-	Cheat sheets ready. Should be able to c/p into google slides templates. Miranta to put into the Resources folder in the Palaeoverse google drive. 

### Website (Lewis)  
-	A few bits to be fixed. Lewis will make all cards hyperlinks (will also fix cards being too skinny on mobile)
-	CRAN Task View to be linked to. 

## Projects
### Using R in palaeobiology: a review of recent developments and future directions/What has R done for palaeobiology? (Will):  
-	CRAN task view done! (https://cran.r-project.org/view=Paleontology)
-	Will will work on an outline and then team work will begin ~February. Waiting for '10 Rules' paper to be finished.

### 10 rules for data cleaning (Lewis):
-	REMINDER: Finish drafting rules and evaluating papers by the 24th January.
-	Draft includes your work to have been reviewed by your assigned editor, so please leave some additional time for them to accomplish this.
-	Chris highlighted that if Question 2 (Has the data been cleaned?) is answered "no", then Question 3 (Has the workflow been documented?) would inherently have to be "no" as the data has not been cleaned, and therefore cannot have a workflow. This has now been clarified that any data processing, including discussion of filtering, counts as a workflow, and thus Question 3 can be answered "yes" even if Question 2 is answered "no".

## Next meeting
2025-02-06, 14:00 UTC

## A.O.B
- N/A

