# Palaeoverse Meetings 2025

# 2025-02-06

Time: 14:00 UTC

Participants: 
- Lewis (Agenda)
- Chris (Minutes)
- Harrie
- Lucas
- Will
- Pedro
- Joe
- Erin
- Bruna
- Bethany

Apologies:
- Ale

## Introductions
Hello, hello, hello (all accomplished fine)

## Packages

### palaeoverse
#### [Active PRs](https://github.com/palaeoverse/palaeoverse/pulls)
- [tax_range_time/strat grouping](https://github.com/palaeoverse/palaeoverse/pull/122)
- [Convert id certainty into binary vector](https://github.com/palaeoverse/palaeoverse/pull/125)
- Active PRs to be dealt with, but waiting on people to settle into new jobs etc. Will bring up again next meeting to assess progress. 

#### [Issues to resolve](https://github.com/palaeoverse/palaeoverse/issues)
- Several issues; Lewis to carve out some time to address.
  
### rphylopic
- Nothing of note.

### rmacrostrat
- No updates on API changes yet from Shanan.
- Likely to be looked at again this month or March.

### sepkoski
- Nothing of note.

## Funding
### NSF/SNSF (Will) 
- Potentially problematic this year. Might be best to wait until dust settles.
- General "War on Woke" happening on NSF grants. Software likely to not be affected by this, but unsure of knock on ramifications.
- Due in November.
- Will keep an eye on it, readdress in April/May.

### PAGES (Erin) 
- Group endorsements
- Event endorsements
- Workshop sponsorship
- Latest deadline: 2nd of March. Some time to put together an application.
- Can apply for basic endorsement (no financial) but can advertise with them and piggyback their network/reach.
- Also funds to get $3000 dollars to help run workshops; unsure if it's for attendees or organisers; Erin to check
- Other funds to get continued financial support for Palaeoverse.
- Have had some support already for Palaeoverse applying.
- Will check on the responsibilities that come with affiliation with PAGES.

## Events
### Lecture series (Erin)
- Advertise! Push on Bluesky.
- Waiting for some final titles from guest speakers.

### CPEG Workshops
- Need to organise a meeting in the next month to get content nailed down, particularly with the large scope of the workshop.
- Overran at NAPC; will need to re-adjust materials.

### GSA workshop (Will)
- Officially have money!
- ¢5000 for folks running the workshop.
- Need to know relatively soon who can attend, and who will assist in running the workshop.
- October 19th to the 22nd, in San Antonio, Texas.

## PalAss Newsletter series (Harriet)
- First draft done for the intro piece, drafted by Lewis and Chris and edited by Harrie.
- Deadline for the next one will be late May, early June.
- First topic: temporal binning.
- What else to include in the series?
- Will draft up a list, and people can put their names down for topics they're interested in.

## Resources
### Materials  
-	Organisation logo available!
-	Lewis will send round link.

### Website (Lewis)  
-	Lewis to update website with organisation logo.
-	Should we replace X/Twitter on website with Bluesky?

### Social media
- Abandon X completely?
- General consensus seems to be to entirely leave Twitter, meaning that Bluesky will become our default social platform.
- Need to share account so that work isn't entirely left to Bethany. Some approval required to log into account. Safe for maybe one or two people, more dubious with many.
- Suggest for another person to assist Bethany.
- Open call at the moment; will revisit next meeting.
- In the meantime, tag palaeoverse in posts that should be shared etc.

## Projects
### Using R in palaeobiology: a review of recent developments and future directions/What has R done for palaeobiology? (Will):  
-	CRAN task view done! (https://cran.r-project.org/view=Paleontology)
-	Waiting on 10 rules to be wrapped to push this forwards.

### 10 rules for data cleaning (Lewis):
-	Discuss publication evaluation and how to move forward
-	Analysis proved problematic; little agreement between us.
-	Leaves several options:
    1. Abandon analysis and continue paper without it.
    2. Go back to the drawing board and redo the analysis; would require work to be redone prior to the full analysis.
- If we do leave it be, could take the analysis into its own separate paper.
- General consensus to leave the analysis for another paper, but highlighting the ambiguity around some of these topics in the present manuscript.
- Two major things to push paper towards the finish line:
    1. One or two people going through the manuscript to come up with a singular 'voice' for the manuscript, tying all of that together. Lewis and Chris volunteered so far; Harriet has volunteered on the call.
    2. Come up with a continuous example showing how you utilise the rules.
- Potentially have a narrative approach to showing how individuals may carry out data analysis. Would also help people who might not have familiarity with R
- Also need a figure potentially.
- **Next step**: Lewis, Harrie and Chris to edits together the document in the next couple of weeks. Will then develop the continued example.
- **Next step**: Will, Bethany, Erin to think about narrative and approach for the vignette.
- **Next step**: Bruna, Pedro, Joe to think about figure. 
- Next steps done by 20th of Feb.
- Aim to submit by the end of the month, or very shortly afterwards. 

## Next meeting
2025-03-06, 14:00 UTC

## A.O.B
- N/A

---

# 2025-01-09

Time: 14:00 UTC

Participants: 
- Lewis (Agenda)
- Chris (Minutes)
- Miranta
- Joe
- Harry
- Ale

Apologies:
- Bethany
- Will
- Erin

## Introductions
Welcome back! Happy New Year!

## Packages

### palaeoverse
#### [Active PRs](https://github.com/palaeoverse/palaeoverse/pulls)
- [tax_range_time/strat grouping](https://github.com/palaeoverse/palaeoverse/pull/122)  
- [Convert id certainty into binary vector](https://github.com/palaeoverse/palaeoverse/pull/125)
- Aim is still to get these wrapped up by the end of January.

#### [Issues to resolve](https://github.com/palaeoverse/palaeoverse/issues)
- More additional features as opposed to bugs.
- Lewis plans to clear one or two by the end of January.

### rphylopic
- Nothing of note

### rmacrostrat
- No updates on API changes yet.

### sepkoski
- Lewis aims to put together a short article on Sepkoski's life including the package as a formal publication, potentially for OPal.

## Funding
### NSF/SNSF (Will) 
- Applying for a sizable 2-3 year grant to run workshops and further develop open science resources in palaeontology (https://new.nsf.gov/funding/opportunities/geo-ose-geosciences-open-science-ecosystem/nsf25-506/solicitation)
- The larger grant would be supporting 1-2 postdocs who would work with OPal/Palaeoverse.

### PAGES (Erin) 
- Group endorsements
- Event endorsements
- Workshop sponsorship
- More details from Erin forthcoming after her and Lewis figure out potential commitments.

## Events
### Lecture series (Erin)
- Settling in to ~35 attendees each week
- Great lineup of upcoming speakers, maybe advertise longer list in January?

### GSA workshop (Will)
- Finally officially approved!
- Looks like we will be able to get some funding (~$1000) for speaker travel, although specifics are still being decided
- More details from Will in the future.
- Will start putting items together this month.

### Greenman Festival Outreach (Chris)
- Nothing to report

## PalAss Newsletter series (Harriet)
- Palaeoverse to do a series in the PalAss newsletter over the next couple of issues.
- Similar to the 'R for Palaeobiologists' series.
- Next issue, aim to write an introduction piece about what we do, highlighting some major things that we have already, e.g. CRAN taskview, Palaeoverse, rmacrostrat, rphylopic etc etc.
- Would need to be completed this month. Deadline is Feb 3rd, but can potentially be pushed a week or so.
- Aim for two A4 pages of non-dense text (approx. 1000 words max).
- Can also use as a space to call for contributions from the community.
- Joint written piece in a google doc.
- Harriet to lead, but open call for contributions.

## Resources
### Materials  
-	Miranta working on organisation logo. Aim to get done by the deadline for the PalAss newsletter.
-	Cheat sheets ready. Should be able to c/p into google slides templates. Miranta to put into the Resources folder in the Palaeoverse google drive. 

### Website (Lewis)  
-	A few bits to be fixed. Lewis will make all cards hyperlinks (will also fix cards being too skinny on mobile)
-	CRAN Task View to be linked to. 

## Projects
### Using R in palaeobiology: a review of recent developments and future directions/What has R done for palaeobiology? (Will):  
-	CRAN task view done! (https://cran.r-project.org/view=Paleontology)
-	Will will work on an outline and then team work will begin ~February. Waiting for '10 Rules' paper to be finished.

### 10 rules for data cleaning (Lewis):
-	REMINDER: Finish drafting rules and evaluating papers by the 24th January.
-	Draft includes your work to have been reviewed by your assigned editor, so please leave some additional time for them to accomplish this.
-	Chris highlighted that if Question 2 (Has the data been cleaned?) is answered "no", then Question 3 (Has the workflow been documented?) would inherently have to be "no" as the data has not been cleaned, and therefore cannot have a workflow. This has now been clarified that any data processing, including discussion of filtering, counts as a workflow, and thus Question 3 can be answered "yes" even if Question 2 is answered "no".

## Next meeting
2025-02-06, 14:00 UTC

## A.O.B
- N/A

